



So I have a p-code VM running on an emulator and I'm building a Pascal compiler that compiles Pascal runtime routines (written in Pascal) to a p-code file and compiles an App (demo or test) to a p-code file.  What is the mechanism for loading, "linking," and running these?  Can a user also compile a Pascal library (user library) and combine that?  What are the conventions? Is there actual module supporting syntax?  Do compiled p-code contain linking info?  How would a p-code emulator handle this?  Is it as simple as concatenating all the p-code files into one file, or does the emulator need to manage and load (and link?) each p-code file at start-up?  i.e. take a list of p-code files at startup? 

You have:

a Pascal compiler that emits p-code

a p-code VM/emulator

runtime routines written in Pascal and compiled to p-code

an application/demo/test also compiled to p-code

possibly user libraries compiled separately

So the real design question is not just “how do I load files,” but:

what unit of compilation is

what unit of linking is

where symbol resolution happens

what the VM is expected to know

whether separate compilation is worth the complexity yet

High-level answer
For an educational Pascal-on-p-code system, the cleanest progression is:

Phase 1
Use a linker outside the VM.

Compile each source file/module/library to an object-like p-code file

Run a p-code linker

Produce one final executable p-code image

The VM loads and runs that one fully linked image

That is the simplest, most conventional design for your stage.

Phase 2
Add separate compilation units with symbol tables/import-export metadata.

runtime.pco

mylib.pco

app.pco

linker resolves references

outputs app.px or app.exe.pcode

Phase 3
Only later, if you want, support dynamic loading or VM-side loading of multiple p-code files.

That is usually not the first thing to build.

Recommended architecture
1. Treat compiled p-code files in two categories
A. Relocatable p-code object
This is like .o in C toolchains.

It contains:

p-code instructions

constant data

static/global variable layout

symbol definitions

unresolved external references

relocation/fixup records

optionally debug info

Example:

runtime.pco

strings.pco

math.pco

app.pco

These are not directly runnable unless they are fully self-contained.

B. Executable p-code image
This is what the VM runs.

It contains:

one final instruction stream

one merged global/static data layout

fully resolved call targets

entry point

no unresolved references

Example:

demo.px

The VM should ideally load only this form at first.

What “linking” means here
In this context, linking means:

combine separately compiled units

resolve external procedure/function references

assign final addresses or indices

merge global/static data areas

set entry point

optionally strip or preserve debug info

So if app.pco calls WriteLn from runtime.pco, the linker decides where WriteLn lives in the final image and patches the call site.

Should the VM load multiple p-code files directly?
Best answer: not initially
You can design a VM that loads a list of p-code files and links them at startup, but that pushes linker complexity into the emulator. That usually makes the VM more complicated than it needs to be.

Better split of responsibilities
Compiler
Produces relocatable p-code objects.

Linker
Combines them into one executable p-code image.

VM
Loads one executable image and runs it.

That separation keeps each component simpler and more testable.

Is concatenation enough?
Usually: no
Simple concatenation only works if all of these are true:

there are no unresolved external references

all addresses are position-independent or symbolic

there is no duplicate symbol conflict

globals/statics do not need relocation

call/jump targets are already correct

initialization order is trivial

That is rarely sufficient once you have more than one separately compiled unit.

So:

Concatenation is okay for a very early prototype

but it is not real linking

If you do concatenation as a bootstrap step, use it only with very strict conventions.

Practical conventions that work well
Option 1: Single-image convention
This is the easiest bootstrap.

Build flow
Compile runtime Pascal sources together

Compile app source

Link into one executable p-code image

VM loads that one file

Example:

pascalc runtime/*.pas -> runtime.pco
pascalc app.pas -> app.pco
pclink runtime.pco app.pco -> demo.px
pcvm demo.px
For user libraries:

pascalc mylib.pas -> mylib.pco
pclink runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco -> demo.px
pcvm demo.px
This is the model I recommend.

Option 2: VM startup with multiple object files
Possible, but more complex.

pcvm runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco
In this model, the VM must:

read all modules

build a global symbol table

resolve imports/exports

assign final code/data addresses

relocate call/data references

identify entry point

possibly run initialization sections

That means your VM is also acting as a linker/loader.

This is valid, but I would only do it if your educational goal includes OS/loader/linker design.

What should be inside a relocatable p-code file?
A good minimal format has sections like these:

Header
magic number

version

flags

module name

Code section
p-code instructions

Constant section
literal strings, numeric constants, typed constants if needed

Static/global data section
size required

optional initial values

Export table
Symbols defined by this unit:

procedures/functions

globals/constants, if exported

module name

Import table
Symbols referenced but not defined in this unit.

Relocation/fixup table
Places in code/data that must be patched after final layout is known.

Optional debug table
source file name

line mappings

procedure boundaries

local symbol info

How should calls work?
There are several workable conventions.

Approach A: Symbolic calls, fixed up by linker
Compiler emits something like:

CALL_EXTERN "WriteLn"
Then linker changes it to:

CALL <absolute-or-module-relative-address>
This is the classic approach.

Approach B: Call by procedure index
Compiler emits import slot references:

CALL_IMPORT 3
The object file’s import table says slot 3 = Runtime.WriteLn.

Linker resolves import slot 3 to final procedure index or address.

This is often cleaner for a VM.

Approach C: Fully qualified module/function references
Example source-level concept:

System.WriteLn

Math.Sin

MyLib.Foo

Compiler records these as qualified external symbols.

This is useful once modules are introduced.

How should globals/statics work?
You need a convention for non-local storage.

Simplest convention
The linker creates one global data area for the final executable.

Each module contributes:

size of globals

initial values if any

export names for globals that are visible externally

Compiler references module globals through relocatable offsets.

Linker assigns final offsets.

VM exposes one “global memory” region to the program.

That is much easier than trying to maintain separate memory regions per p-code file.

Pascal-specific question: are there modules?
Historically: it depends
Classic Pascal itself did not have a single universal standard module system that everyone used the same way.

Different Pascal families added different compilation-unit concepts:

UCSD Pascal: units / segments / libraries in its own ecosystem

Turbo Pascal: unit

Modula-2: separate module system, strongly related in spirit

ISO Pascal: less practical module support than later dialects

So for your system, you have freedom.

Recommendation
Do not wait for a perfect historical module system.

Define your own minimal module/unit convention first.

For example:

unit Strings;

interface
  procedure PutString(s: PChar);
  function Length(s: PChar): Integer;

implementation
  procedure PutString(s: PChar);
  begin
    ...
  end;

  function Length(s: PChar): Integer;
  begin
    ...
  end;
end.
and in the app:

program Demo;

uses Strings, Runtime;

begin
  ...
end.
Even if your initial compiler does not support full Pascal unit syntax, you can still model the same semantics internally.

Do compiled p-code files contain linking info?
For separate compilation, they should.

At minimum they need:

module name

exported symbol names

imported symbol names

fixup records

section sizes

Without that, the linker or loader has nothing to work with.

If you emit only raw p-code instructions with no metadata, then separate compilation becomes hard or impossible unless you impose rigid conventions such as numeric library slot tables.

Minimal viable design choices
Here are three realistic designs.

Design 1: Monolithic compile
Compile everything together in one compiler invocation.

Pros
simplest by far

no linker needed

ideal for first working system

Cons
no real separate compilation

slow rebuilds later

awkward for reusable libraries

Flow
pascalc runtime.pas mylib.pas app.pas -> demo.px
pcvm demo.px
This is great for day 1.

Design 2: Separate compile + offline linker
This is the sweet spot.

Pros
clean architecture

reusable libraries

conventional

VM remains simple

easy to debug

Cons
must design object format and linker

more moving parts than monolithic build

Flow
pascalc -c runtime.pas -> runtime.pco
pascalc -c mylib.pas -> mylib.pco
pascalc -c app.pas -> app.pco
pclink runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco -> demo.px
pcvm demo.px
This is what I would build.

Design 3: VM as loader/linker
VM takes multiple files.

Pros
interesting if you want a loader-oriented architecture

convenient command-line UX

groundwork for future dynamic loading

Cons
VM becomes more complex

harder to test/link/debug cleanly

mixes concerns

Flow
pcvm runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco
Do this later, if at all.

Best bootstrap strategy
Stage 0: No modules, no separate linking
Support:

one program

runtime included automatically

one output executable image

This gets you moving quickly.

Stage 1: Relocatable object files
Compiler emits .pco with:

code

consts

exports

imports

relocations

Stage 2: Offline linker
Linker:

merges modules

resolves imports

produces .px

Stage 3: Source-level uses or unit
Add Pascal syntax for separate compilation.

Stage 4: Library archives
Later you can support something like:

rtl.pca = runtime library archive

math.pca

strings.pca

The linker pulls in only needed modules.

Library conventions
A user library absolutely can be supported.

Common convention
A library is not one magical special thing. It is either:

A set of object modules
mylib/
  strings.pco
  fileutil.pco
  mathutil.pco
or

An archive
mylib.pca
containing multiple modules plus an index.

For an educational system, start with plain lists of object files. Archive support can come later.

Name resolution conventions
You need rules for duplicate names and namespaces.

Recommended convention
Use qualified symbol names internally:

Runtime.WriteLn

Strings.Length

App.Main

Even if source code can refer to WriteLn unqualified after uses Runtime, the linker should store fully qualified names.

That avoids symbol collisions and simplifies error messages.

Entry-point convention
The executable image needs a well-defined start symbol.

Examples:

Main

Program.main

App.$main

__start

I recommend a hidden compiler-generated entry point:

program unit exports Program.$main

linker sets executable entry point to that

runtime can optionally wrap it with startup/teardown

For example:

__start:
  call Runtime.Init
  call Program.$main
  call Runtime.Exit
  halt
This is a clean separation.

Runtime initialization conventions
If units/modules can have initialized globals or setup code, you will eventually want:

per-module init routine

init order based on link order or dependency order

optional finalization later

Minimal convention:

each module may export hidden Module.$init

linker builds startup sequence calling them before main

You do not need this on day 1, but plan space for it.

What should the emulator do?
Minimal emulator responsibilities
The emulator/VM should:

load one executable p-code image

allocate VM memory regions

set PC, SP, FP, globals base

run interpreter loop

provide host services / memory-mapped I/O as needed

optionally expose debug/disassembly info

What it should not do initially
symbol resolution

archive scanning

import/export matching

relocation across multiple objects

dependency selection

That is linker work.

If you really want VM-side multi-file loading
A workable startup convention would be:

pcvm runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco
VM startup algorithm:

Read all module headers

Verify versions / VM ABI compatibility

Build export symbol table

Check for duplicates/conflicts

Build combined code/data layout

Apply relocations

Identify entry point

Run module init routines

Run main

This is doable, but it is essentially a linker plus loader in one place.

A neat compromise is:

keep a reusable link/load library

CLI linker uses it offline

VM can optionally use the same code for convenience mode

But architecturally, still think of it as linker logic, not core interpreter logic.

Suggested file format family
You might define:

File type	Purpose
.pco	relocatable p-code object
.px	executable p-code image
.pca	p-code archive/library
.pdb or embedded debug section	source/debug metadata
That makes the pipeline legible.

Very practical recommendation for your project
Given where you are, I would adopt this exact convention:

Compiler outputs relocatable modules
Each Pascal source file that is meant to be separately compiled becomes one module object:

runtime.pas  -> runtime.pco
mylib.pas    -> mylib.pco
app.pas      -> app.pco
Each .pco contains:

module name

code section

const section

static data size

export table

import table

relocation records

Linker produces one executable
pclink runtime.pco mylib.pco app.pco -o demo.px
Linker:

resolves imports against exports

merges code/data

assigns final addresses

creates startup stub

sets entry point

VM runs one file
pcvm demo.px
That is the cleanest convention.

What syntax should Pascal have?
You asked whether there is actual module syntax. Yes, many Pascal systems had one, but you can choose how much to implement now.

Easiest path
Start with a very small uses model.

App
program Demo;
uses Runtime, MyLib;
begin
  MainDemo;
end.
Library-like module
You can initially cheat and compile non-program files as named modules with exported public symbols, even before full interface/implementation syntax exists.

Later add proper unit syntax.

Good staged plan
First
Internal module metadata only.

Next
Source-level uses.

Later
Full unit ... interface ... implementation.

Benefits and risks of the different choices
Concatenate-only bootstrap
Benefits
trivial implementation

fastest path to “something runs”

Risks
brittle

no true external symbol resolution

hard to grow

Offline linker
Benefits
clean abstraction

supports runtime + user libs naturally

closer to real toolchains

simpler VM

Risks
requires object format and relocations

more up-front design

VM-side loader/linker
Benefits
flexible startup

can evolve toward dynamic loading

Risks
emulator becomes bloated

harder debugging

mixes concerns

My concrete recommendation
For your Pascal-on-p-code system:

Adopt these conventions
1. Separate compile output format
A .pco module is relocatable, not directly runnable.

2. One offline linker
The linker combines:

runtime module(s)

optional user library module(s)

app module

into one .px executable image.

3. VM only runs executable images
The VM should take exactly one final executable file at first.

4. Support libraries as lists of modules first
Do not implement archive libraries until later.

5. Use qualified symbol names internally
Even if source syntax is simpler.

6. Add uses first, full unit later
This gives you practical modularity without overcommitting to a big front-end syntax project.

A good first ABI/convention set
Here is a simple starting point.

Each module defines:
module name

exported procedures/functions

imported procedures/functions

static data size

code bytes

const bytes

relocation entries

Linker rules:
module names must be unique

exported symbol names are internally qualified as Module.Symbol

unresolved imports are errors

duplicate exports are errors

final image gets:

code segment

const segment

global/static segment

entry point

optional debug map

VM rules:
load final image

initialize stack/global pointers

call __start

execute until HALT

Direct answer to your main question
Is it as simple as concatenating all the p-code files into one file?
Only for a very temporary bootstrap, and only if your compiler emits code under strict assumptions. In general, no.

Does the emulator need to manage and load/link each p-code file at startup?
It can, but it is better not to at first. Put that logic in a separate linker.

Can a user compile a Pascal library and combine that?
Yes. Treat user libraries exactly like runtime modules: compile to relocatable p-code objects, then link them with the app.

Are there conventions and module syntax?
Yes historically, but they varied by Pascal system. For your system, define a small unit/module convention and grow it incrementally.

Do compiled p-code files contain linking info?
They should, if you want separate compilation. At minimum: exports, imports, relocations, module name, section sizes.

Suggested next implementation order
Define .pco object format

Emit exports/imports/relocations from compiler

Write tiny linker

Define .px executable format

Keep VM focused on loading/running .px

Add source-level uses

Later add proper Pascal unit syntax

If you want, I can next draft a minimal .pco / .px file format and a tiny linker algorithm tailored to an educational Pascal p-code VM.


I'm leaning towards the Turbo Pascal approach (if I understand it),  The compiler would emit linking metadata in ".spc" (p-code) files.  A linker would combine the app with user and system (runtime) files into some ".xxx" loadable file for the VM on emulator.  the s in spc stands for source (spc is a text, not binary format).  The ".xxx" (to be named) file is also text, I think, probably loaded through a UART into the emulator.  Sounds good?  So my question is, what language should I write the linker in?  The compiler is in C.  The VM and emulator are in Asembler.  The runtime is in Pascal. I'm leaning towards C, however, there is no file system, so the linker needs to take a stream of text (possibly delimited) to produce the output text.

Yes — that sounds like a good direction.

You are converging on a sensible split:

Pascal compiler emits textual .spc module files

each .spc contains:

p-code text

symbol/import/export metadata

relocation/fixup metadata

a linker combines:

app

user libraries

system/runtime modules

linker emits one final loadable text image

VM/emulator consumes that final text image, likely over UART

That is a clean architecture, especially for an educational system without a filesystem.

Short answer
Write the linker in C.

That is the best choice for your current stage.

Not Pascal, not assembler.

Why C is the right choice
1. It matches the compiler toolchain
Your compiler is already in C, which means:

you already have a host-side C build flow

your linker naturally belongs to the same host toolchain

compiler and linker can share:

symbol structures

parsing utilities

module-format constants

diagnostics style

test harnesses

That is a major practical benefit.

2. The linker is fundamentally a host tool
The linker is not really part of the target runtime.

It is a build-time tool.

So it should run on your development machine, where you already have:

files

memory

strings

sorting/searching

test infrastructure

Even if the target machine has no filesystem, the linker does not need to care. The linker runs before the VM ever sees the program.

So:

target has no filesystem

host does have one

linker should be a host-side program

That strongly favors C.

3. A linker is mostly text parsing, symbol tables, and fixups
Those jobs are much easier in C than in assembler.

A linker typically needs:

line/token parsing

string comparison

maps/tables of symbols

lists of unresolved references

duplicate symbol detection

multiple passes

good error reporting with module/line info

Assembler is a poor fit for that unless the point of the exercise is specifically “write a linker in assembly.”

C is much better.

4. Pascal is the wrong bootstrap layer right now
You could imagine eventually writing the linker in Pascal, but right now that creates circular dependency risks:

compiler needed to compile Pascal linker

linker needed to combine runtime/modules

Pascal environment not yet mature

linker is part of the infrastructure needed before Pascal is fully comfortable

So for now, Pascal should stay on the target-language side, not the toolchain-implementation side.

Later, once your Pascal system is mature, rewriting parts of tooling in Pascal could be an interesting self-hosting milestone.

But not first.

Important architecture point
You said:

there is no file system, so the linker needs to take a stream of text (possibly delimited) to produce the output text

That is fine, but this is really two separate issues:

Build-time representation
How the compiler and linker exchange modules.

Load-time transport
How the final image gets into the emulator/VM.

Those do not need to be the same thing.

You can absolutely do this:

On the host
compiler reads files

linker reads files or stdin stream

linker emits one final text image

For loading into emulator
host sends final linked text image over UART

The lack of filesystem on the target does not force the linker itself to be stream-only internally.

My recommendation
Write the linker in portable host-side C, but design it with a clean input abstraction so it can support both:

normal files

stdin / delimited stream input

That gives you the best of both worlds.

Best design approach
1. Make the linker a host CLI tool in C
Example:

spclink runtime.spc userlib.spc app.spc -o app.pxe
or

cat runtime.spc userlib.spc app.spc | spclink --stream -o app.pxe
The tool can support both models.

2. Define a textual module format that is stream-friendly
Since .spc is text, make each module self-delimiting.

For example:

MODULE Runtime
VERSION 1
EXPORT WriteLn
EXPORT Exit
IMPORT PutChar
CODE
  ...
ENDCODE
RELOCS
  ...
ENDRELOCS
ENDMODULE
Then concatenating multiple modules into one stream is easy:

MODULE Runtime
...
ENDMODULE
MODULE UserLib
...
ENDMODULE
MODULE App
...
ENDMODULE
Your linker can read until ENDMODULE, then start the next.

This is much better than relying on arbitrary delimiter characters.

3. Emit a final text executable format
For example, not .xxx, but something like:

.pxe = p-code executable

.pxt = p-code text executable

.run

.img

.pcm

.pvm

.pex

I would avoid .xxx, obviously, as placeholder only.

A nice pair might be:

.spc = symbolic p-code module

.pex = p-code executable text image

or

.spc = source-like p-code object

.pxe = p-code executable

That feels coherent.

What the linker should do
Your linker in C should probably perform these steps.

Pass 1: Parse modules
Read all modules from files or stream:

module name

exports

imports

code records

data records

relocation/fixup records

optional entry marker

Pass 2: Build global symbol table
For every export:

record symbol name

defining module

relative address/index

Check for:

duplicate definitions

reserved names

missing entry point

Pass 3: Assign final layout
Compute final positions for:

each module’s code

each module’s constants/data

entry point

optional init routines

Pass 4: Resolve imports and apply fixups
For each unresolved reference:

find symbol in global table

compute final target

patch output representation

Pass 5: Emit final linked text image
Output one text image in the format the VM loader understands.

Streaming input is not a problem
You do not need a filesystem on the target, and you do not even strictly need one on the linker input side if you do not want it.

A stream-oriented C linker is easy enough.

Two good models
Model A: linker reads named files
Simplest for development.

spclink runtime.spc strings.spc app.spc > app.pex
Model B: linker reads one concatenated stream
Useful for pipe-based workflows and later automation.

(cat runtime.spc; cat strings.spc; cat app.spc) | spclink --stream > app.pex
If each module is explicitly delimited with MODULE / ENDMODULE, this is straightforward.

Do not force the linker output to be too low-level too early
Since the final output is text sent over UART, you have options.

Option 1: final output is already VM-ready p-code text
The VM just loads it and runs.

Pros
simplest VM

linker fully resolves everything

very conventional

Cons
less flexibility later

This is probably the best first design.

Option 2: final output is still somewhat symbolic
The VM resolves some references at load time.

Pros
more flexible

Cons
VM becomes partly a linker/loader

I would avoid this initially.

Language choice comparison
C
Benefits
easiest fit with your compiler

excellent for host-side tooling

easy parsing and data structures

easy testing

easy portability

easy integration with build scripts

Risks
manual memory management

must be careful with parser robustness

Still the best choice.

Assembler
Benefits
runs anywhere eventually

educational

Risks
terrible for text parsing and symbol management

harder to debug

much slower to evolve

not worth it here

Not recommended.

Pascal
Benefits
nice eventual self-hosting milestone

dogfooding your language

Risks
bootstrap circularity

you are not there yet

linker is too foundational to depend on immature Pascal tooling

Good later, not now.

Rust
Since you personally are strong in Rust, this would also be a very strong technical choice on the host side.

Benefits
safer parsing/data handling

excellent enums/AST modeling

very good testability

Risks
does not match current compiler implementation language

harder to share code with your C compiler

another host-toolchain dependency

If this were a greenfield host toolchain, I might seriously consider Rust. But given your compiler is already in C, C still wins on cohesion.

A very practical recommendation
Write the linker in C as a standalone host tool
Structure it like this:

Front-end parser
Reads textual .spc modules from:

files

stdin stream

Internal representation
Something like:

typedef struct {
    char *name;
    Vector exports;
    Vector imports;
    Vector code_lines;
    Vector relocs;
    int is_program;
} SpcModule;
Linker core
Pure functions/logic for:

collecting modules

building symbol table

assigning addresses

applying fixups

generating final image

Output writer
Writes final linked text format for UART loading.

This separation will make the tool much easier to evolve.

Conventions I would strongly suggest
1. Use explicit module boundaries in text
Example:

MODULE App
TYPE program
IMPORT Runtime.WriteLn
EXPORT App.$main
CODE
  ...
ENDCODE
ENDMODULE
This makes streaming trivial.

2. Use qualified symbol names internally
Even if user source says:

uses Runtime;
internally store:

Runtime.WriteLn

App.$main

This avoids collisions.

3. Keep linker metadata separate from raw code lines
Do not try to infer imports/exports from code text if you can avoid it.

Have explicit sections:

EXPORTS
  App.$main
IMPORTS
  Runtime.WriteLn
RELOCS
  CALL 17 Runtime.WriteLn
CODE
  ...
Much easier to parse and debug.

4. Make the final executable format simpler than .spc
A module/object format may contain:

imports

exports

relocs

A final executable should contain little or none of that.

Instead it should contain:

header

entry point

final code/data

maybe debug map

That keeps VM loading simple.

About the “no filesystem” issue
I want to separate this clearly.

Target side
No filesystem is fine.

The VM can load:

UART stream

ROM monitor input

memory buffer

serial loader

No issue.

Host side
Your linker absolutely can still use files during development. There is no contradiction.

Even if you later decide that your build pipeline feeds the linker entirely by pipe/stream, implementing the linker in C is still fine.

So I would not let “no filesystem on target” drive you away from a normal host-side C linker.

A good near-term workflow
During development
Use files because they are easier to inspect and test.

pascalc -c runtime.pas > runtime.spc
pascalc -c mylib.pas > mylib.spc
pascalc -c app.pas > app.spc
spclink runtime.spc mylib.spc app.spc > app.pex
uartsend app.pex
Later
Support stream mode too:

(
  pascalc -c runtime.pas
  pascalc -c mylib.pas
  pascalc -c app.pas
) | spclink --stream | uartsend
That gives you both convenience and architectural purity.

My opinion on naming
Since .spc is text and object-like, I would pick something like:

.spx for linked executable text

.pex for Pascal executable p-code text

.pim for p-code image

.ldp for linked p-code

Of those, I like:

.spc = symbolic p-code compilation unit

.spx = symbolic p-code executable

or

.spc = source p-code object

.pex = p-code executable

pex is probably clearer to humans.

Bottom line
Best answer
Write the linker in C, as a host-side streaming-capable tool.

Why
Because:

it fits naturally with your compiler

linkers are build tools, not target runtime code

C is much better than assembler for parsing and symbol resolution

Pascal is too early in your bootstrap chain for this role

stream input/output is easy to support in C

Recommended design
textual .spc modules with explicit MODULE ... ENDMODULE

host-side C linker

final linked text executable format such as .pex

VM/emulator loads only the final executable text image over UART

Best implementation stance
Support both:

file-based input for development

stream-based input for automation and UART-oriented workflows

That gives you the least pain now and the most flexibility later.

If you want, I can next sketch a minimal textual .spc module format and a matching .pex executable format, plus the exact passes and data structures for a small C linker.


To clarify, one of the "host" systems is COR24, an embedded system with no file system.  I built the bootstrap toolchain in Rust to run on Mac or Linux (C cross-compiler, assembler, emulator).  But I also built tools to run on the COR24: Macro Lisp, Forth, p-code assembler and p-code VM.  The Pascal compiler is in cor24 C with the runtime in Pascal both producing p-code.  So, I guess your suggestion to write the linker in Rust makes sense,  I was thinking ahead when more tools are hosted on COR24 itself, so prematurely constraining myself to UART in/out (like stdin/stdout).

Yes — with that clarification, Rust is the better choice for the linker.

Your environment is really two-hosted:

Restated architecture
Host A: development host
Mac/Linux, with:

Rust bootstrap toolchain

cross C compiler

assembler

emulator

richer tooling

normal filesystem and process model

Host B: self-hosted target
COR24, with:

no filesystem

Macro Lisp

Forth

p-code assembler

p-code VM

Pascal compiler in COR24 C

Pascal runtime in Pascal

stream/UART-oriented workflows

So the key design decision is:

where should the first real linker live?

and

what constraints should its format assume now so it can later migrate onto COR24?

Short answer
Recommendation
Write the first linker in Rust on Mac/Linux, but design:

the module format

the executable format

and the linker core algorithm

so they are not dependent on filesystems, only on streams of text records.

That gives you:

fast progress now

good parser/data-structure ergonomics

solid testing on Mac/Linux

future portability to COR24

no premature lock-in to file-based tooling

no need to contort the design around UART-only operation today

Why Rust now makes sense
Earlier, C was reasonable because the compiler was in C. But with your clarification, the bigger picture matters more:

1. The linker is part of the bootstrap/control plane, not the target runtime plane
Your Pascal compiler running on COR24 is important, but the linker is still more naturally a toolchain orchestration component than a tiny embedded runtime primitive.

For now, Rust on Mac/Linux is your strongest environment for building reliable infrastructure quickly.

2. You already have a Rust-based bootstrap ecosystem
That changes the weighting substantially.

If your cross tools, assembler, and emulator are already in Rust, then the linker belongs naturally alongside them.

That gives you:

shared command-line style

shared text parsing helpers

shared tests

shared integration with emulator/UART loaders

shared code for record parsing/serialization if you choose

So even though the Pascal compiler is in COR24 C, the build orchestration layer is already Rust-centric.

3. Linkers are mostly parser + symbol-table + fixup engines
Rust is an excellent fit for:

tokenization and parsing

structured enums for records

ownership of symbol tables and module graphs

deterministic error handling

tests for malformed metadata

avoiding memory corruption bugs in infrastructure tools

A linker is exactly the kind of tool where Rust tends to feel good.

4. You do not want to prematurely collapse “portable format” into “UART-only CLI semantics”
This is the most important part of your clarification.

You said you were:

prematurely constraining myself to UART in/out (like stdin/stdout)

I think that is exactly right.

The important thing is not “stdin/stdout everywhere.”

The important thing is:

define a transport-neutral textual object/executable format
That means the same module or executable can be:

stored in a file

concatenated in a pipe

sent over UART

embedded in ROM

pasted into a monitor

generated by Lisp/Forth/Pascal tools on COR24

The format should be independent of transport.

That is the right abstraction boundary.

Strong recommendation: separate these concerns
You want to avoid mixing three different layers.

Layer 1: object/executable representation
What .spc and final executable text look like.

Layer 2: linker algorithm
How imports/exports/fixups are resolved.

Layer 3: transport
How bytes/characters move:

file

pipe

UART

memory buffer

monitor console

If you keep those cleanly separated, you can write the first linker in Rust without harming your eventual COR24 self-hosting story at all.

Recommended path
Phase 1: Rust linker on Mac/Linux
Build a robust linker quickly.

Inputs:

.spc text modules

from files, stdin, or memory buffers

Output:

linked executable text image

Loader:

existing emulator UART loader or direct host injection

This gets you productive immediately.

Phase 2: stabilize the textual object format
Once .spc and the final executable format are stable, they become the real ABI.

That matters more than the linker implementation language.

If the format is stable and transport-neutral, later you can reimplement the linker in:

COR24 C

Pascal

Forth

Lisp

or a stripped-down embedded linker/loader

without changing the compiler output format.

Phase 3: optional reduced linker on COR24
Later, if you want self-hosted development on COR24, you can implement one of these:

A. full linker on COR24
Takes multiple .spc streams and emits final executable stream

B. incremental linker / loader
More limited; resolves known module tables

C. library-free monolithic builder
For constrained use cases, combine compiler output and runtime in one pass

But you do not need to decide that now.

So what should the first linker API look like?
Not “UART-only.”

Instead, I would design the Rust linker around something like this conceptually:

Core linker API
Consumes:

an iterator of parsed modules

or an iterator of text records

Produces:

linked executable object/image

and separately a serializer to text

Then build thin front ends:

File mode
spclink runtime.spc app.spc -o app.pex
Stream mode
cat runtime.spc app.spc | spclink --stream > app.pex
UART mode
spclink runtime.spc app.spc | uartsend
Embedded testing mode
Directly call Rust functions with strings or byte buffers.

This is the best of all worlds.

File system vs no filesystem
A useful mental model:

Do not optimize for “no filesystem”
Optimize for “no required random access in the object format.”

Those are different.

A filesystem-free environment mainly pressures you toward:

self-delimiting records

forward-readable formats

low memory overhead

limited passes if possible

But it does not require you to reduce everything to stdin/stdout as the only software abstraction.

For example, a COR24 linker could still consume:

one module at a time from monitor input

multiple modules from ROM

memory-resident buffers produced by the Pascal compiler

Forth strings or blocks

Lisp-generated text

The same textual record format can support all of that.

Design implications for .spc
Because you may eventually support linking on COR24, your textual module format should be:

1. self-delimiting
Each module clearly starts and ends.

MODULE Runtime
...
ENDMODULE
2. line-oriented
Easy to parse on a small system.

3. explicit
Do not rely on inferencing imports/exports from code text if possible.

4. forward-readable
No need for backpatching in the raw textual representation.

5. not dependent on files
No assumptions like “module name comes from filename.”

Instead, include the module name in the content.

Recommended implementation language ranking now
Given the clarified architecture, my ranking would be:

1. Rust
Best first linker implementation.

Why
already part of your host bootstrap ecosystem

safer and cleaner parser/data structures

great for tests

easy to expose both stream and file front ends

easy to later generate trace/debug outputs

2. C
Still viable, especially if you want close affinity with the Pascal compiler implementation.

Why not first anymore
Because your broader host toolchain is already Rust-heavy, and the linker benefits more from robust parsing/data handling than from tight coupling to the C compiler’s implementation language.

3. Pascal on COR24
A future milestone, not a first implementation.

Good later for
self-hosting story

dogfooding Pascal modules/libraries

proving toolchain maturity

4. Forth or Lisp on COR24
Interesting experimental or educational versions later.

Not first, unless the point is specifically to explore language-hosted tooling.

5. Assembler
Only if you want pain for educational reasons.

Not recommended.

Important strategic point
The object format is more important than the linker language.

If you get these right:

object/module records

symbol naming conventions

fixup conventions

executable record format

loader expectations

then the first linker can be in Rust and later replaced without regret.

That is the key.

Best medium-term strategy
I would explicitly choose this path:

Step 1
Write a Rust reference linker on Mac/Linux.

This becomes the specification-by-implementation.

Step 2
Keep .spc simple and line-oriented.

Step 3
Keep final executable text image even simpler than .spc.

Step 4
Teach the VM/emulator to load only the final executable form.

Step 5
Later, if desired, create:

a reduced COR24 linker

or a COR24 loader that can consume prelinked text images

or a monolithic COR24 compiler mode that bypasses separate linking

What not to do
Do not make UART the semantic model
UART is only one transport.

Do not make filenames semantically important
Modules should name themselves internally.

Do not make the VM do full linking yet
Keep linking outside the VM for now.

Do not over-design for archive libraries yet
Multiple modules in a stream or list are enough initially.

Do not require binary format yet
Text is fine, especially for debugging and bootstrap.

A strong practical design
You could define:

.spc
Textual relocatable module format

Contains:

module declaration

kind (program, unit, runtime, library)

exports

imports

code

relocations

optional constants/statics metadata

optional debug/source lines

.pex
Textual linked executable image

Contains:

version

entry point

final code stream

final data layout

optional debug map

The emulator/VM only needs to understand .pex.

The Rust linker converts many .spc modules into one .pex.

Later, a COR24 linker can do the same if desired.

Why this keeps future options open
With this approach, later you can support all of these without redesigning the world:

On Mac/Linux
compile + link + UART load

On COR24
compile program to .spc

compile library to .spc

link locally from streams/buffers

or just ship .spc back to host for linking

or build monolithic linked images directly

That flexibility comes from the format design, not from choosing stdin/stdout as the primitive.

Bottom line
Yes — with your clarified setup, Rust is the best choice for the first linker.

Why
Because:

your bootstrap host toolchain is already Rust-based

a linker is mostly structured parsing and symbol resolution

Rust is excellent for that

the first linker should live where development speed and testability are highest

future COR24 self-hosting should be enabled by the format design, not forced by the first implementation language

Best design principle
Do not constrain yourself to “UART in / UART out” as the primary software model.

Instead design:

transport-neutral text formats

self-delimiting modules

a linker core independent of files vs streams

Then give the Rust linker multiple front ends:

file input

stdin stream

string/buffer input

UART sender integration as a separate tool

That keeps you moving fast now without boxing you in later.

If you want, I can next draft a minimal .spc grammar and a matching Rust linker internal model with the exact passes and symbol/fixup records.




